I feel very sad that my profession has
not taken the harms the drug treatments
can do more seriously very sad about
that I'm very sad that the profession is
neglecting the other ways that we can
help people
it is neglecting to develop other
possibilities and and other avenues to
help and support people and to enable
people to help and support themselves
and each other of course there were
people in the psychiatric profession who
very nobly have stood up and in critical
of drug treatments there have always
been people like that but to many people
I think too many psychiatrists have just
accepted that drug treatments are good
and have not wanted to contemplate that
actually these treatments could be
harmful so I've called this mainstream
view the disease centered model of drug
action and this is the idea as I said
that these drugs are working by
correcting an underlying abnormality and
it's an idea that's borrowed from
general medicine where most drugs are
also understood to act in that way so
but it doesn't necessarily mean that the
drug is targeting the cause of the
disorder so for example insulin in
diabetes might be a drug that you think
of is working in this way it's not it's
not treating the cause of diabetes but
by replacing the deficient insulin
supply it's helping to normalize it's
helping to rectify the underlying
abnormality helping to normalize the
body so the other way that we can think
about what psychiatric drugs might be
doing is what I call the drug centered
model and I've called it this to
emphasize that these drugs are drugs
that is substances that alter the way
that the body functions and what I'm
suggesting in this model is that far
from working by normalizing the body
these drugs are working by creating an
abnormal or altered state and because
they are a special sort of drug called
psychoactive drugs that is they work on
the brain and therefore they alter
feelings thoughts emotions
behavior the altered states they create
interact with the symptoms or problems
that we call mental disorders and
sometimes these these altered states may
be useful in someone who is suffering
from a deep depression or an intense
psychotic state but it's not that
anything's been normalized it's that the
altered state the drugs create may be
preferable to the the mental experiences
that they're having at the time so an
example of this way of thinking about
drugs that maybe not too controversial
is the idea that alcohol is useful for
social anxiety disorder which was
something I was taught when I was
training just in case you think that
ingesting just bringing that in so the
idea was not that alcohol corrected a
chemical imbalance or obviously that it
riveted that it replaced an alcohol
deficiency the idea was that the the
characteristics of alcohol intoxication
which we're all familiar with include
being becoming socially less inhibited
which can be useful for someone who is
particularly who finds social situations
difficult psychiatric drugs are
psychoactive substances and this is
sometimes forgotten so that's this is
just why I'm putting this this slide up
there is no fundamental difference
between them and other psychoactive
substances the ones were familiar with
of course are the substances that are
used recreationally the difference might
be that most psychiatric drugs produce
states that are not particularly
pleasant but that doesn't mean that
they're they're fundamentally different
in any way they still like all drugs
alter the body and like all psychoactive
drugs because they work on the brain
they they produce altered mental states
as well and like all drugs they produce
tolerance that is the effects that they
have initially don't necessarily last
because the body adapts to their
presence and for the same reasons you
get withdrawal symptoms when they're
stopped like other psychoactive
substances the states that they produce
means that people are not necessarily
very good at judging how they're how
they're functioning when they're under
influence of the drug what someone
called Peter Breggin an American
psychiatrist has called a process of
spellbinding we're familiar with that
with alcohol for example aren't we that
we're not necessarily very good judges
of of what we can do when we're
intoxicated with alcohol Joanna thank
you so much for taking the time to chat
with me today for the mad at America
podcast I wanted to ask you about the
recent study into antidepressant
efficacy announced in The Lancet and
widely covered in the UK news media on
Thursday February 22nd you've written
about some of the limitations of that
study including a piece format in
America so the study is a better
analysis so that means that the authors
have got the data from together from
lots of different trials of
antidepressants and combine the data to
get an overall effect measure the the
main conclusion is that antidepressants
are more effective than than placebo and
that conclusion is what's being used as
the basis of the headlines all over the
world media to say that it's confirmed
that antidepressants work the problem
with that conclusion is that other
innumerous problems with it but one of
the problems is that the way that
they've analyzed the data actually
inflates the difference between
antidepressants and placebo and if you
analyze that if you analyze the data
differently which in fact they did in
their study in the appendices if you get
as far as reading them they're actually
finding effects that show that the
difference between antidepressants and
placebo are very small so maybe I should
just I just like to expand on that a bit
more cuz it's quite a complex point so
the the data that they've analyzed is
what they call response rates they
define response in the same way that
most trial ists define response as the
percentage of people whose rating
depression rating scale scores drop by
50% or more during the study now that is
an arbitrary definition of response and
it's not the primary data that was
collected the primary data that is
collected in these trials is the the
score that people have on the depression
rating scales so what you should analyze
in a trial and in a meta-analysis of
trial
is the primary data is the scores on the
rating scales and if you analyze that
data as I said before what you find is
that difference between antidepressants
in placebo in terms of depression scores
is very small and way below the
difference that probably indicates a
minimal clinically significant level of
improvement the other interest group
that's obviously been influential in
promoting this view of psychiatric drug
treatment is the pharmaceutical industry
although interestingly in the 1950s and
60s up to the 1980s really the
pharmaceutical industry will also could
play both games they could promote
psychiatric drugs as disease-specific or
as as psychoactive substances and they
were they were quite happy to do both
but then there was and they were
involved in the early days of creating
the modern idea of depression along with
the antidepressants in the early 1960s
but then in the 1980s there was a crisis
over the widespread use of
benzodiazepines and the idea of using
mind-altering substances to shut people
up keep people quiet stop people
complaining got a very bad reputation
rightly of course and so was david
Healy's very cleverly shown they started
to change the market for the
benzodiazepines into a market for
antidepressants and they needed to get
away from that bad reputation they
needed to portray the antidepressants as
something that were avert were reversing
an underlying disease so that disease
center model became very important to
them in the early 1990s so the idea that
there was an underlying deficiency or
disease was sold in a package with the
drugs they very much came together the
idea that you had a chemical imbalance
and therefore you needed an
antidepressant in the 1990s with the
marketing of the SSRIs like prozac Eli
Lilly were one of the funders of a big
campaign in the UK and I know they've
been campaigns here and campaigns in
Australia
that a similar campaigns designed to
increase the use of antidepressants by
increasing the number of people who are
diagnosed with the depression so this
campaign suggested that 5% of the
general population had depression ten
percent of people attending general
practitioners it was it emphasized that
antidepressants are not addictive which
has transpired is completely wrong and
is now accepted as completely wrong and
it emphasized that they should be given
for for a few months and not just used
for a brief period it was very
successful we've already seen how much
the prescribing of antidepressants has
increased I'm trying to I'm trying to
suggest that there's a better way of
thinking about what drugs might be doing
when we use them for mental health
problems that we need to acknowledge
that their drugs that they're
psychoactive substances and we need to
understand those effects more and when
we do that we can use them in a rational
and more collaborative way and a more
cautious way because this the point
about the disease centered model that I
think so dangerous is that it assumes
that drug treatment is going to be
beneficial because of course if there's
an underlying problem and the drugs are
helping to normalize it well of course
it's a good idea to take them why
wouldn't you the drug centered model on
the other hand by emphasizing that these
substances are drugs assumes that they
might be harmful and therefore you have
to make a good case for using them and I
think it's I hope that I've shown you
that I think it's only when we stand
back from this literature that you're
able to realize how we've got to this
situation where we have a potentially
dangerous and completely unfounded model
of the way that psychiatric drugs work
that model has become the standard
accepted way of understanding these
substances and the basis on which they
are used it's all based on the idea that
the drugs are somehow rectifying some
underlying problem and until we
understand that they're not doing that
or that we've got no evidence that
they're doing that we don't really know
how to interpret the evidence we've got
so for example if you give children a
sedative drug like an anti-psychotic
and measure their mania schools their
mania schools will go down a bit they
will be less hyperactive less irritable
and they'll sleep more that doesn't mean
that we've cured anything or done
anything very useful what we've done is
we've sedated those children and until
we understand what the drugs we give to
people are doing we don't know how to
interpret the evidence that's my
position on it why because people talk
about fantastic results but people have
always talked about fantastic results
with all sorts of therapies that we now
know were completely useless and often
quite dangerous so you have to do proper
studies and what the proper studies show
as you probably know is that drugs like
antidepressants are only very minimally
different from a placebo and that
minimal difference in my opinion is
because they are psychoactive
mind-altering drugs they make people
feel different they suppress their
emotions of it so that's what we're
doing to people that's why we need to
understand what the drugs are that we're
using what sort of effects do they have
what sort of mind-altering behavior
altering effects do they produce and I
think that the effects that say
antidepressants produce are just not
useful
I don't see why being a little bit
suppressed emotionally is going to help
someone and feeling a bit groggy and
having your libido taken away that your
libido taking right I don't see why
that's going to help someone who's
depressed I'm not I'm saying is we
really have no evidence that these drugs
are curing depression
[Music]
evolution